Scala3 Documentation (#3)
scalacenter/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/scala3-book/collections-classes.md

---
title: Collections Classes
type: section
description: This page introduces the common Scala 3 collections classes.
num: 37
previous-page: collections-intro
next-page: collections-methods
---

{% comment %}
TODO: add a correct hierarchy image
{% endcomment %}

> 

Reviewer: I do not agree with using the term `classes` so much in this file, it is not completely correct.
 `List` could, in the future, be represented as an `enum` and `Map` is only a trait with a companion object that uses subtypes of Map, not a class. The same goes for `Set`

Reviewer 2: Thanks for this. I changed most occurrences to “types,” or otherwise deleted them.

> This page demonstrates the common Scala 3 collections classes and their accompanying methods. Scala comes with a wealth of collections classes, but you can go a long way by starting with just a few classes, and using the others as needed. Similarly, each class has dozens of functional methods to make your life easier, but you can achieve a lot by starting with just a handful of them.

Reviewer: `functional` might not be the best term

Therefore, this section introduces and demonstrates the most common classes and methods that you’ll need to get started. When you need to understand more classes or more methods, see the Reference documentation for all the details.

## Three main categories of collections classes

> Looking at the Scala collections classes from a high level, there are three main categories to choose from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking at Scala collections from a high level, there are three main categories to choose from:
```

- Sequences
- Maps
- Sets

> A _sequence_ is a linear collection of elements and may be _indexed_ (like an array) or _linear_ (like a linked list). A _map_ contains a collection of key/value pairs, like a Java `Map`, Python dictionary, or Ruby `Hash`. A _set_ is a sequence that contains no duplicate elements. All of those classes have basic types, as well as subsets of those types for specific purposes, such as concurrency, caching, and streaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _sequence_ is a linear collection of elements and may be _indexed_ (like an array) or _linear_ (like a linked list). A _map_ contains a collection of key/value pairs, like a Java `Map`, Python dictionary, or Ruby `Hash`. A _set_ is an unordered sequence of unique elements. All of those classes have basic types, as well as subsets of those types for specific purposes, such as concurrency, caching, and streaming.
```

In addition to these three main categories, there are other useful collection types, including ranges, stacks, and queues. Ranges are demonstrated later in this section.

> The following sections introduce the basic classes you’ll use on a regular basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections introduce the common types you’ll use on a regular basis.
```

There are a few other classes that act like collections, including tuples, enumerations, and the `Option`, `Try`, and `Either` families of classes. See the TODO section(s) for more details on these classes.

> ## Common collections classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Common collections
```

> The main collections classes you’ll use on a regular basis are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main collections you’ll use on a regular basis are:
```

The basics of each class are demonstrated in the following sections.

>In Scala, a _buffer_ — such as `ArrayBuffer` and `ListBuffer` — is a sequence that can grow and shrink.

{% comment %}
TODO: mention Array, ArrayDeque, ListBuffer, Queue, Stack, StringBuilder?
{% endcomment %}

### A note about immutable collections

In the sections that follow, whenever the word _immutable_ is used, it’s safe to assume that the class is intended for use in a _functional programming_ (FP) style. With these classes you don’t modify the collection; you apply functional methods to the collection to create a new result.

## Choosing a sequence class

When choosing a _sequence_ class — a sequential collection of elements — you have two main decisions:

- Should the sequence be indexed (like an array), allowing rapid access to any element, or should it be implemented as a linear linked list?
- Do you want a mutable or immutable collection?

The recommended, general-purpose, “go to” sequential collections for the combinations of mutable/immutable and indexed/linear are shown here:

| Type/Category         | Immutable | Mutable      |
| --------------------- | --------- | ------------ |

> | Indexed               | `Vector`  |`ArrayBuffer` |

Reviewer: What about `Array` ?

Reviewer 2: I’m sorry if this sounds naive, but when should you use `Array`? Is it primarily for performance?

| Linear (Linked lists) | `List`    |`ListBuffer`  |

For example, if you need an immutable, indexed collection, in general you should use a `Vector`. Conversely, if you need a mutable, indexed collection, use an `ArrayBuffer`.

>`List` and `Vector` are often used when writing code in a functional style. `ArrayBuffer` is commonly used when writing code in a mutable style. `ListBuffer` is used when you’re mixing styles, such as building a list

The next several sections briefly demonstrate the `List`, `Vector`, and `ArrayBuffer` classes.

## The `List` class

[The List class](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/current/scala/collection/immutable/List.html) is a linear, immutable sequence. This just means that it’s a linked-list that you can’t modify. Any time you want to add or remove `List` elements, you create a new `List` from an existing `List`.

### Creating Lists

This is how you create an initial `List`:

```scala
val ints = List(1, 2, 3)
val names = List("Joel", "Chris", "Ed")

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
val namesAgain = "Joel" :: "Chris" :: "Ed" :: Nil
```
```

You can also declare the `List`’s type, if you prefer, though it generally isn’t necessary:

```scala
val ints: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3)
val names: List[String] = List("Joel", "Chris", "Ed")
```

One exception is when you have mixed types in a collection; in that case you may want to explicitly specify its type:

```scala
val things: List[Any] = List(1, "two", 3.0)
```

### Adding elements to a List

Because `List` is immutable, you can’t add new elements to it. Instead you create a new list by prepending or appending elements to an existing `List`. For instance, given this `List`:

```scala
val a = List(1,2,3)
```

You _prepend_ one element with `+:`, and multiple elements with `++:`, as shown here:

```scala

> val b = 0 +: a              // List(0, 1, 2, 3)

Reviewer: I think `::` is a lot more common than `+:`

You can see how lazy a `LazyList` is in the REPL:

```scala
val x = LazyList.range(1, Int.MaxValue)
x.take(1)      // LazyList(<not computed>)
x.take(5)      // LazyList(<not computed>)
x.map(_ + 1)   // LazyList(<not computed>)
```

In all of those examples, nothing happens. Indeed, nothing will happen until you force it to happen, such as by calling its `foreach` method:

````
scala> x.take(1).foreach(println)
1
````

For more information on the uses, benefits, and drawbacks of strict and non-strict (lazy) collections, see the Reference documentation.

<!--
Given that definition, collections can also be thought of in terms of being strict or lazy. In a _strict_ collection, memory for the elements is allocated immediately, and all of its elements are immediately evaluated when a transformer method is invoked. In a _lazy_ collection, memory for the elements is not allocated immediately, and transformer methods do not construct new elements until they are demanded.
-->

## The Vector class

> [The Vector class](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/current/scala/collection/immutable/Vector.html) is an indexed, immutable sequence. The “indexed” part of the description means that it provides random access and updates in effectively constant time, so you can access `Vector` elements rapidly by their index value, such as accessing `listOfPeople(123_456_789)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[The Vector class](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/current/scala/collection/immutable/Vector.html) is an indexed, immutable sequence. The “indexed” part of the description means that it provides random access and update in effectively constant time, so you can access `Vector` elements rapidly by their index value, such as accessing `listOfPeople(123_456_789)`.
```

val names: Vector[String] = Vector(Joel, Chris, Ed)

scala> for name <- names do println(name)
Joel
Chris
Ed
```

## The ArrayBuffer class

Use `ArrayBuffer` when you need a general-purpose, mutable indexed sequence in your Scala applications. It’s mutable so you can change its elements, and also resize it. Because it’s indexed, random access of elements is fast.

### Creating an ArrayBuffer

To use an `ArrayBuffer`, first import it:

```scala
import scala.collection.mutable.ArrayBuffer
```

If you need to start with an empty `ArrayBuffer`, just specify its type:

```scala
var strings = ArrayBuffer[String]()
var ints = ArrayBuffer[Int]()
var people = ArrayBuffer[Person]()
```

If you know the approximate size your `ArrayBuffer` eventually needs to be, you can create it with an initial size:

```scala
// ready to hold 100,000 ints
val buf = new ArrayBuffer[Int](100_000)
```

To create a new `ArrayBuffer` with initial elements, just specify its initial elements, just like a `List` or `Vector`:

```scala
val nums = ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3)
val people = ArrayBuffer(
  Person("Bert"),
  Person("Ernie"),
  Person("Grover")
)
```

### Adding elements to an ArrayBuffer

> Append new elements to an `ArrayBuffer` with the `+=` and `++=` methods. Or if you prefer methods with names you can also use `append`, `appendAll`, `insert`, `insertAll`, `prepend`, and `prependAll`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Append new elements to an `ArrayBuffer` with the `+=` and `++=` methods. Or if you prefer methods with textual names you can also use `append`, `appendAll`, `insert`, `insertAll`, `prepend`, and `prependAll`.
```

var nums = ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3)   // ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3)
nums += 4                         // ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3, 4)
nums += (5, 6)                    // ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
nums ++= List(7, 8)               // ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
```

### Removing elements from an ArrayBuffer

`ArrayBuffer` is mutable, so it has methods like `-=`, `--=`, `clear`, `remove`, and more. These examples demonstrate the `-=` and `--=` methods:

```scala
val a = ArrayBuffer.range('a', 'h')   // ArrayBuffer(a, b, c, d, e, f, g)
a -= 'a'                              // ArrayBuffer(b, c, d, e, f, g)
a --= Seq('b', 'c')                   // ArrayBuffer(d, e, f, g)
a --= Set('d', 'e')                   // ArrayBuffer(f, g)
```

### Updating ArrayBuffer elements

Update elements in an `ArrayBuffer` by either reassigning the desired element, or use the `update` method:

```scala
val a = ArrayBuffer.range(1,5)        // ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 3, 4)
a(2) = 50                             // ArrayBuffer(1, 2, 50, 4)
a.update(0, 10)                       // ArrayBuffer(10, 2, 50, 4)
```

See the Reference documentation for more `ArrayBuffer` information and examples.

## Working with Maps

> A `Map` is an iterable sequence that consists of pairs of keys and values. Scala has both mutable and immutable `Map` classes, and this section demonstrates how to use the _immutable_ `Map` class.

Reviewer: Map is trait with a companion object, not a class

```scala
val a = Map(
  1 -> "one",
  2 -> "two",
  3 -> "three"
)

val b = a.updated(3, "THREE!")   // Map(1 -> one, 2 -> two, 3 -> THREE!)
```

## Traversing a Map

As shown earlier, this is a common way to manually traverse elements in a map using a `for` loop:

```scala
val states = Map(
  "AK" -> "Alaska",
  "AL" -> "Alabama",
  "AZ" -> "Arizona"
)

for ((k,v) <- states) println(s"key: $k, value: $v")
```

That being said, there are _many_ ways to work with the keys and values in a map. Common `Map` methods include `foreach`, `map`, `keys`, and `values`. 

Scala has many more specialized `Map` classes available, including `CollisionProofHashMap`, `HashMap`, `LinkedHashMap`, `ListMap`, `SortedMap`, `TreeMap`, `WeakHashMap`, and more. See the Reference documentation for more details on `Map` methods and these specialized subclasses.

## Working with Sets

{% comment %}
Types of Set classes:
- BitSet, HashSet, LinkedHashSet, ListSet, TreeSet, SortedSet
{% endcomment %}

The [Scala Set class]({{site.baseurl}}/overviews/collections-2.13/sets.html) is an iterable collection with no duplicate elements.

> Scala has both mutable and immutable `Set` classes. This section demonstrates the _mutable_ `Set` class.

Reviewer: I believe that the immutable version is more common.
In both cases `Set` is a trait and companion object, not a class

Author: I agree, I also use immutable sets way more often than mutable sets.

### Adding elements to a Set

The mutable `Set` class isn’t in scope by default, so first you need to import it:

```scala

> val set = scala.collection.mutable.Set[Int]()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import scala.collection.mutable.Set
val set = Set.empty[Int]
```

Author: I would suggest the following, overloading `Set` can be confusing.
```suggestion
import scala.collection.mutable
val set = mutable.Set[Int]()
```
